my name is Alok energy I'm a
psychiatrist practicing in Boston
Massachusetts welcome to another healthy
gamer GG stream just a reminder that
everything that we do on stream is
intended to educate and support y'all
but nothing is intended to be medical
advice and I will say this now more than
ever that this is not a substitute for
mental health treatment and so if you
guys are struggling you really we're
gonna basically spend the whole second
talking about this but we're gonna spend
you guys should really get help go see a
licensed professional I'm not kidding
about that a lot of people will reach
out to me and say dr. kay I'll pay you
whatever you want I just want one
session and I want to make this clear
that one session with me is not going to
fix your problems I know that's what
people think six sessions with me is not
going to fix your problems and yeah I
mean what what fixes problems is actual
mental health treatment and we try
really hard to support people into
getting that when necessary in in our
hope here our mission here is to help
people understand that mental health is
real that it's devastating that you can
understand your mind and that there are
ways to help yourself in addition to
mental health treatment understanding
yourself that's what our mission is and
I'm going to talk about that too so a
couple of just simple disclaimers the
first is that I mean I'm gonna talk
about Byron and reckful but like it's he
still has a right to privacy and
confidentiality
so I'm not gonna like answer any
questions about him or anything like
that so I mean y'all can ask that I'm
just not going to say anything I think
you know there's a lot more to his story
than most people know and his people who
are close to him kind of know that yeah
so let's get started
it's the first thing that I want to talk
about is depression so this is gonna
sound kinda weird I've always thought I
had a weird realization when I was
training to become a psychiatrist and
that is that depression is the HIV of
the mind and what do I mean by that I
know it sounds weird but just hear me
out
so like you know when you get an
infection like let's say you get a skin
infection like you know the infection
attacks your skin well let's say you get
a GI bug like a stomach bug or you get
the flu and it attacks like your upper
respiratory system it attacks your
stomach tax your skin and then your
immune system is like how you fight back
right so your immune system activates
and it goes and it fights a war with the
infection in your skin and your stomach
and after a couple days you're better
the reason why HIV is such a devastating
disease is because it attacks your
actual immune system it attacks your
ability to fight back and this is
another bad gaming analogy but like I
think of most infections as jungle
creeps in dota or MO and like they don't
actually attack you back they just sure
if you go and pick a fight with them
they're gonna fight you but like they're
not like attacking your throne right
they're not attacking they're not
attacking you back like your soldiers
are free to fight them but HIV is
different
HIV is like the enemy team it attacks
you back it attacks you in the way that
like you fight it's not neutral it's not
just sitting there attacking some random
part of your body and then like your
immune cells like your white blood cells
are just there to like go to town in it
and that's why that's why infections
generally speaking don't kill us
right we get flus and colds and stomach
bugs like we get that stuff all like you
know all the time most of it doesn't
kill us
HIV Kelsey HIV kills tons of people it's
devastating it's a it used to be a death
sentence and why is that because it
attacks your ability to fight back and
that's what
depression it's depression attacks your
ability to fight back it makes you think
that you can't win it makes you think
that the people that love you would be
better off without you it controls your
actions it attacks your very ability to
fight back and so that's what makes it
so devastating we rely so much on our
mind to help us out to protect us to
help us move forward in life and
depression attacks that I mean like
anxieties bad sure I mean there all
kinds of you know mental this is that
are bad but I think depression is is in
some ways the most devastating because
it takes your biggest weapon and it
turns it against you right your thought
your mind which wink which can be
compassionate and helpful and brilliant
and analytical suddenly becomes this
thing that is attacking you and that's
what's so devastating and I don't know
if you guys saw you know Byron's last
tweets but like I mean he knew it too
right he said that like you're not in
control and that's what it does
so over 50% of adults over 50% okay just
think about this in middle and
high-income countries and developed
countries are gonna suffer from some
mental health problem in their life
we're not talking about cancer cancer
like at the end of the day is
devastating but effects like a small
percentage of people right what five
percent maybe mental health is can
affect more than 50% of people so it's I
mean people talk about kovat is a
pandemic and absolutely it is and Kove
it's terrible but like mental health is
an epidemic that has been silent and
been ravaging the developed world
probably the thurible countries as well
but definitely busts for years and it's
getting worse
and I don't think we're doing enough
about it so let's talk for a second
about suicide so when we say mental
health is getting worse
so suicide overall over the last decade
is increased by a third you know we're
getting better at treating other
diseases like cancer rates are down
heart disease rates generally speaking
or down I mean those are the diseases
that tend to happen when we get older so
you know things like Alzheimer's are on
the rise but that's probably just
because we're living longer but mental
health is actually increasing in in
what's really scary is that like a 33
percent increase in the population
doesn't mean that everyone is increasing
33 percent what's really happening in
mental health is that suicide rates are
doubling have doubled I think in the
last decade in teenagers so in 2003 the
suicide rate amongst teenagers increased
by 8% I have no idea what happened in
2003 they go up they're going up by
about 5% per year video game addiction
is doubled in the last five years the
33%
driven by the whole population it's
driven by us we're the ones that are
killing ourselves more and more so I
don't know if you guys get this but
suicide is literally killing us I know
it's a weird thing to say but the second
most dangerous thing to you is you you
are actually gonna be them the second
most likely cause of your death and by
you I mean between the ages of ten and
thirty four the number one cause of
death is accidents car accidents getting
hit by meteors like whatever just like
sure so the most dangerous thing to you
is like completely random there's
nothing you can do about it second most
dangerous thing to you is you it's not
cancer it's not heart disease it's not
like I mean I guess you've got an
accidents connecting but you are you are
you are the most dangerous controllable
thing the in your life the only factor
that you can control because you can't
control accidents like I can't control
if I'm like you know I'm on a plane and
it goes down the most lethal thing to
you is actually in your control and
that's you so the first thing that I
want to say is don't worry alone and
don't die alone suicide and depression
get bad because they turn what should be
a multiplayer game into his player name
right and I mean that's what happens we
start to isolate because then if it's a
multiplayer game like that's that's what
we do right that's what twitch is about
its multiplayer you have friends you
have allies to have us we have you and
what depression does is turns it into a
single-player game and this game was not
designed to be played along I don't know
if you guys get that but you look around
it's society and society is made of
people
the first thing that I'd say to you is
don't worry alone and don't dial them if
you're worried about someone top someone
something just talk to someone it
doesn't matter who talk to someone
anyone talk to your friends talk to your
family talk to your buddies on Steam
talk to your buddies on you know reddit
twitter instagram twitch talk to
something and tell people what you want
to do cuz give them a chance because
that's what we need right like we just
need a chance to help you and you need
to give us a chance to help you because
that's what we want to do right you
think about the people like if you have
friends that want to kill themselves
what do you want from them you just want
a chance to be a part of their
conversation in their life you can't
save them that's okay but you just want
to be involved and so it's a it's a big
motto that we have sort of on the
coaching side which is don't worry alone
if you've got a problem like just don't
don't play a solo player game like if
you're playing Dark Souls you know call
in a son bro to help you out because
right now what's what's happening in
this country
is it is an epidemic of disconnection
every year that goes by I want you guys
to just think about this for a second we
are a greater threat to ourselves for
the most part we've like sort of
conquered infections right even HIV like
HIV is no longer a death sentence in
fact the life expectancy with HIV is
getting close to normal like if your
heart is clogged and can't breathe we
can actually hook your heart up to a
machine that that circulates your blood
while we take a vein from your leg and
attach it to your heart
and then you have a bypass in your heart
works again like what
the actual [ __ ] we are capable of doing
that if you have a knee that is torn
apart from arthritis we can literally
remove the knee and put in a piece of
metal and you can walk again
right now there are tons of people who
are dying from kovat and it's terrible
but what's crazy is that some of them
are living and the reason that they're
living is because we have a thing called
a ventilator and what a ventilator is
like we can literally breathe for you we
can pump your heart for you we can
breathe for you we can replace your
joints we can do dialysis which is for
your kidneys right so like we can every
three days you can go to a dialysis
center it filters all of your blood and
does the work of your kidneys so you
don't even need a kidney oh and by the
way we can do transplants we can take an
organ from one human being and stick it
into another team of people what the
[ __ ] that's crazy
medicine is amazing we also have TPM
total parenteral nutrition if you can't
eat we can stick an IV in your arm and
give you food and sustenance we can keep
you alive without eating we can keep
your you alive without your heart
beating we can keep you alive without
your breathing we can keep you alive
without your kidneys working we can keep
you alive without you eating we can
replace your joints and we can craft
organs into you from another human being
what's missing what can't we do we can't
do anything for your brain and we can't
do anything for your mind this is the
problem that we face in as society
changes I don't know exactly what's
going on but we have an epidemic of
disconnection we can't fix this for you
medicine can't fix it for you this is
the one thing we can't fix for you we
can literally like replace every other
organ of your body we can if you're if
you don't have lengths we can give you a
wheelchair if you can't speak we can
give you a voice box can't do anything
for the mind and not anything that's we
can't
I set for you all right let me say that
and so this is getting worse and we
haven't figured out how to fix it yet
and so we've got to do more as a society
we'll talk about that and I think what
we're seeing is this epidemic of
disconnection people are hopeless
they're lonely they're depressed they
use substances they self-medicate we're
going to talk about that and so how do
we understand like what's going on so
first thing is like we're gonna talk
about risk factors for suicide so you
guys are gonna get professor Andy today
so I want you guys to think about our
community and I want you to think about
whether these things apply to us or not
risk factors for suicide Tromp has that
happened to anyone that you know is that
a part of your life physical emotional
sexual whatever mental illness I know it
sounds kind of bizarre but mental
illness is a risk factor for suicide
right not everyone who kills themselves
is actually mentally ill and that's a
strange thing to say yes it may be
conversation for a different day
substance use is that an issue in our
community you know it's interesting
because a lot of people have come
forward about a lot of you know
important secrets that need to be told
bringing things to light recently and I
think that's healthy
the one thing that shocked me was like
how common substance abuse was in all of
their stories someone's been drinking
and we got to look long and hard at the
culture we promote I've been thinking
long and hard about the drunk AMA so the
last time I had that much to drink was
3500 days ago I don't drink very much
but it occurred to me that like
I'm demonstrating that that's okay and
I'm supporting that and I don't think
that that's right I think about it so
substance use self medication let me
tell you guys something about self
medication self medication doesn't work
makes you feel good but it doesn't
actually fix the problem substances
don't fix the problem they make you feel
better and I don't blame you for using
it because sometimes you need to use it
because you've got to get through the
day you know and we certainly saw that
with byron
fix the problem so it fixes the problem
is actually working at the problem it's
mental health treatment that's what you
guys a lot of y'all need and so if
you're self-medicating think long and
hard about self medication and
medication in general is a bridge it's a
bridge to a better life but self
medication is a bridge to note
there's nothing on the other side of
that if you if you wake up every day and
you drink and you get high like what is
that leading you towards like sure it
helps and I get that your anxiety is
overwhelming but like what like where's
that going are you gonna wake up one day
and then like you don't need to get high
for your anxieties out what's gonna
happen you're gonna wake up one day and
say like oh I don't need the alcohol
anymore my problems are all fixed are
you gonna wake up one day and you're
gonna say oh I don't need to play a
video game for 14 hours today because I
don't like I have a fulfilling life and
I'm happy with who I am as a person it's
a bridge to [ __ ] number so I'm an
addiction psychiatrist and I get that
like sometimes it's hard to survive in
your mind but for [ __ ] sake start
building at least another bridge
you can't overcome
I guess you can but you know my strategy
to overcome an addiction is to make the
addiction no longer necessary
we're healthy gamer we're not treating
video game addiction we changed and
we'll talk a little bit about that too
but you have to do the other stuff too
substance use isn't a treatment self
medication isn't really medicating
anything it's just ignoring a problem
and so it's not just depression it's not
just suicide if you guys have a
substance use problem get some help
and it doesn't have to be medical like
treatment is a good thing but there are
communities like Alcoholics Anonymous
Narcotics Anonymous
you know marijuana Anonymous cvaa
computer game gaming addicts Anonymous
and we'll talk a little bit about that
too other risk factors for suicide
suicide clusters and what does that mean
absolutely crazy but suicide is
contagious when someone kills themselves
in its prominent other people kill
themselves so something that I want
every person to understand right now is
that statistically the most likely
source of your death that you have an
influence over is you it's not someone
else it's you and over the next weeks to
months you're more likely to try to kill
yourself you were your biggest threat
and we know this so suicide clusters
have been a big problem in Japan a lot
of good literature comes out of there
but after Robin Williams passed away
people died there was actually I think
an increase in suicides after Netflix
released 13 reasons why which is a story
about suicide so understand that your
mind may be attacking you more over the
weeks to come
and I want you guys to really think
about that for a second because if your
mind starts to attack you more it also
means that your mind can attack you less
if you can get more suicidal over time
what it also means is that you can
become less suicidal
over time and that's I know it sounds
like so simple but in the mind of a
suicidal person they believe that the
downward trend is gonna go forever and
that's where hopelessness comes but
that's just not true
if suicidality is a fluctuating
attribute in your mind it doesn't just
go downward it's gonna go up at some
point all things in the mind come to an
end that is the nature of the mind
everyone's crying a lot right now
everyone is sorry in 2077 we're not
going to be that sad it's just the way
of the mind sometimes there are
celebrations and then your mind feels
wonderful and then that changes this is
something that you guys have to
understand the mind returns to
equilibrium you just have to buy it
enough time give yourself time talk to
someone else let them help you get get
back to the equilibria ting mind I know
it feels like it's hopeless I know it
feels like it's forever because that's
what mental illness does to us it makes
us feel like the present is eternal but
that's just not [ __ ] true it's just
not true it feels like kovat is gonna go
on forever i mean maybe but it's not
gonna go on forever it feels like it but
that's just not how it works things
change over time that is the nature of
time things change and so just buy
yourself time don't do it today and then
tomorrow don't do it that day reach out
to people and give yourself time and
recognize that your you may need mental
health treatment now more than ever and
so we're gonna talk about that in a
second but so what are the other risk
factors isolation sound familiar
a sense of loss unwillingness to seek
help feeling hopeless that are a couple
of others so no water we're killing
ourselves more that's us
that's twitch that's our community we're
disconnected we feel hopeless we smoke
pot a lot of us have dealt with abuse
and so this is us we're isolated but
here's the cool thing so I live in a
world where I truly do believe that we
are never given a challenge without the
tools to overcome it and like that's
kind of a weird belief as an optimism no
I don't think it's optimism I think it's
actually a deep principle of karma or
physics that if you take a neutron and
you split off a positron you're left
with an electron right that like you
can't move from neutrality without
creating like positive and negative that
in order for ice to cool a drink it has
to warm up everything has two sides like
that's just an attribute of nature
there's no like one side of anything in
order for me to get calories I have to
eat something else energy is neither
created nor destroyed largely true of
matter isn't power and so I think that
that's like a deep principle of our
universe which applies to like really
really bizarre kind of like
psychological stock way down the road
and y'all are welcome to disagree with
that but in my life I have truly
believed that we are given the tools to
overcome our challenges that it's the
challenge that creates the tool why are
we here at healthy gamer like we are
here at healthy gamer because the the
soil was fertile for us to grow is
interesting because Bobby Skaar said
like I predicted your coming I saw you
or like I knew you were gonna come how
can you do that because that's what
happens right like in terms of civil
rights or black lives matter police
brutality is the negative side of like
these protests and black lives matter we
have the tools to overcome our
challenges and that's not like optimism
it's like it's deeper than that it's not
a belief it's like a truth and so we
we struggle with an epidemic of
disconnection and so what are our
weapons right because like when you're
like the final boss is like mental
health like and that's what I mean about
all this physical stuff like we've
conquered the body we [ __ ] conquered
it like just think you don't need your
heart to survive anymore if your heart
is [ __ ] we can literally take your heart
out of your body and stick another one
in there the final boss is mental health
and that's where we are in society we're
at the end of the game it's like
late-game civilization where like at the
beginning it's like you're fighting
against wolves and [ __ ] and eventually
it's like we get to this this is the
final boss this is the final boss you
know universal basic income people don't
need to work anymore we grow food
hydroponically and we can grow way more
food vertically than we can grow like
horizontal you just think about as a
society when we start growing food in a
vertical dimension we don't need people
to work like [ __ ] is automated now we're
gonna have self-driving cars what's left
the mind that's the final bus this is it
this is the climax this is the raid boss
this is the end of the game that's the
boss that we're fighting and you're damn
right it's hard because the final boss
is the hardest because we can't use
science
I can't biopsy your depression and just
give you a pill to make it go away
because depression is complicated mental
health treatment is a part of it but
there's more to it what are our weapons
clinical care is number one
that's psychiatry mental health
treatment but protective factors against
suicide
clinical care is at the top of the list
go [ __ ] get treatment if you feel bad
about what it is or if you feel
stigmatized or you're like you don't
know how to do that
don't worry alone talk to someone about
it weapon number two protective factors
against suicide success to support
structures this is what our
responsibility
is an online community and I just don't
mean helping anyone I mean twitch
I mean steam I mean whatever take your
pick that we support each other I want
you guys to think about this who here
has ever met reckful you got a never met
the [ __ ] guy you guys have never met
me how can I do anything for you
just think about how awesome this tool
is at our disposal that you can watch
another human being in a different
country not even talk to you just
[ __ ] talk Hatun and you can feel
connected to them and you can grieve
their loss so hold on a second because
that's that's a [ __ ] nuke against the
final boss because we can form
connections with each other that are
real and powerful without ever beating
each other that we're we're a society
that doesn't need to leave the house
between ubereats grocery delivery and
Amazon to day delivery you never need to
leave and so we become isolated and at
the same time we've got a weapon against
that because the computer is what
isolates us and that's what gives us the
opportunity for connection skills and
problem-solving actually protect a
factor against suicide we're good at
that we're good at solving problems
that's our Forte we're [ __ ] smart the
study done by the Department of Defense
found that people who play video games
are ten to twenty percent smarter than
people who don't
among soldiers seriously our intellect
is one of our greatest weapons and
that's why depression is so devastating
because that's when we turn it against
ourselves it's hard right it's like mind
control like if you guys think about
mind control in video games right like
you like charm and enemy and then they
like they fight for you and if they
charm you then you fight for them and
the stronger the character is that gets
charmed the more screen you are so our
mind is our greatest weapon and it's
also our greatest enemy
cultural beliefs religious beliefs
that's actually on both sides that can
be a risk factor or a protective factor
so I don't know what we believe about
suicide I think our culture is evolving
and we've got to think a little bit
about that so let's talk about that for
a second what is our culture so what is
our culture
how do we how do we act how do we treat
each other
to think long and hard about this so
with all this stuff with like sexual
harassment sexual assault coming out a
lot of people ask how could this happen
how could this happen
how did the tournament organizers not
know how twitch should do this about it
Emmett cheer should resign if all this
didn't stop right like blaming everyone
you can how could this happen what makes
our culture we do so when when someone
we had female game gamers on stream this
Monday and they kind of said like you
know if they speak in boys chat they get
toxic responses and people call them in
all kinds of I want to stick my
blankety-blank in your blankety-blank
and then there are two things that that
happen right so one is that like
sometimes like most people just don't
speak up and then sometimes they get a
white knight which is just as bad and
they're like m'lady let me fedora
your face and let me defend humanity
just treat them like humans let me tell
you you guys are gonna know how we stop
toxicity on the internet you know how to
make gaming a safe place for women it's
actually really really really simple
when one person is toxic towards a woman
you don't have to attack them you don't
have to defend you got to say hey man do
you think you can call it a little bit
like do you really think what you're
doing is decent and then what do they do
they start calling you as soon fine you
let them you don't have to fight them
you don't have to convince them you
don't have to do any of that [ __ ] you
don't have to show them you're right
though that's all you say like hey man
can you lay off and then if he keeps
going you can apologize to the woman you
could say hey I'm sorry you have to deal
with this sounds like it sucks I can
only imagine if there's something I can
do let me know that's all you got to say
30 seconds of speech and then he can get
mad at you why does he get mad at
because you're [ __ ] right does that
solve the problem no in the next game
there needs to be someone else like you
and in the next game there needs to be
someone else like you and I guarantee
you that if that person plays ten games
in a row where there is a single person
that's like hey man why don't you lay
off they're gonna shut the [ __ ] up on
game 11 they're not even gonna do it you
and I are gonna convince them of
anything that's how we solve toxicity
it's not
tournament organizers it's not twitch
it's not streamers it's [ __ ] you and
you think about when you've been hateful
and you think about when you've been
toxic and when you've grabbed your
pitchfork friends let me explain
something to you if someone who is
sexually assaulted is not grabbing their
pitchfork
you better [ __ ] put yours down the
right to justice and judgement is the
party who's aggrieved
not the person browsing reddit and I
think you do have an individual
responsibility and like I think it's
good that you advocate for people and
sometimes people are so [ __ ] up that
they can't advocate for themselves and
then you do need to grab their pitchfork
because they're not bringing theirs I'll
admit that that's that's absolutely a
scenario but for the most part that
should be the minority and if someone
says hey I forgive this person I don't
want you guys to tar and feather them
you all should think about that like who
are you to say otherwise and as you look
at yourself I think you're gonna
discover all kinds of important things
that the beef that you're fighting has
nothing to do with them it has to do
with a beef of your own life and that's
what you need to fix
where does hatred come from where does
anger come from do we just grow up
hating people sure some of it is
conditioned
some of it is and gets conditioned by
the culture right why do why do people
call or wire people toxic to women in
video games it's because no one stops
them and other people are and we see the
wide difference in different kinds of
communities I'm not gonna like name
different communities but just go and
look at different streamers see the kind
of communities they cultivate how do
they do that it's because of the way
that they act it's because of the
participants like I don't know if you
guys get this but I don't create the
community I don't even participate in
the community you guys are the community
the credit for the health of the healthy
gamer community goes to you doesn't go
to MIT and if you're a part of a toxic
community the blame goes to the
community it goes to you and so everyone
is sort of saying like how could this
happen it's such a systemic problem
toxicity and like like you know sexual
assault and sexual harassment
and at gaming right it's not just fair
it's like everywhere and if it's a
systemic problem
it needs a systemic solution and a
systemic solution means you need to get
the [ __ ] up off your chair and get
involved and when it comes to depression
and suicide and disconnection you have
two very important responsibilities one
is that you take care of yourself and
the second is you try to take care of
other people so cultural beliefs are a
protective factor of suicide so the
question that I have for you is what is
our cultural belief about suicide
how are we going to treat it do we think
it's okay or not okay are we gonna reach
out to someone are we not going to reach
out to someone let me ask you guys a an
interesting question what is the best
way for you to get someone else to
disclose their suicidal thoughts to you
any idea ask them is incorrect listen is
incorrect are you good is incorrect are
you okay is incorrect
Trust is wrong you disclose yours first
so [ __ ] you model the behavior
you be vulnerable you share and if
you're not suicidal don't share that
share something else
don't worry alone
remember that your struggles are a
multiplayer game - if you want to help
someone else start by asking for their
help because think about this this is
fine I have hope because everyone looks
at this gaming community and they see
toxicity that's not pricey because it
boggles my mind how little y'all take
care of yourselves and how hard you work
to take care of other people it's
[ __ ] amazing right let you think
about what you're not willing to do for
yourself but you're willing to do for
other people like this is a community
that can beat the final boss because at
the end of the day when we separate you
from your toxic environment y'all are
good people and so we've got a chance
like sure it's the final boss but like
we've got what it takes because at the
end of the day I've been looking for God
awfulness within this community from day
one we've asked like in cells and a dude
with a waifu to come on and if there
isn't some degenerate [ __ ] on the
internet isn't it that kind of stuff and
these people shockingly turn out to be
decent and normal human beings because
we all are and as long as you like date
like just peel a couple of layers of the
onion back you're gonna find decency
underneath if that wasn't the case
healthy gamer would be nowhere so give
yourself a chance to be a decent human
being
give yourself a chance to be vulnerable
give a chance give yourself do people
the favor of letting them help think
about that for a second if someone's
like hey man like how you have the
capacity to make someone feel like they
have purpose in life if you let them
help you cuz if you help someone out
like if someone like if your friend has
a flat tire and they call you and you're
like absolutely man I'll be there you
change the flat tire they go home how do
you feel about yourself after that you
feel damn good B and you should
you have worth you can see your worth in
the world the problem is that we don't
give ourselves opportunities to see all
worth in the world and to lean on
someone else for support go for it it'll
help you and it'll help them so kind of
going back to suicide so let me say this
so reckless suicide was absolutely a
tragedy and it wasn't the first and it's
not going to be the last so as a
psychiatrist when I interview people I
don't know what the risk factors of
suicide are and I know that pretty much
every person that we interview checks a
lot of those boxes I know that because I
used to check a lot of those boxes and I
know that like before I even showed up
on stream I've worked with hundreds of
gamers who checked a lot of those boxes
in reckful suicide was a tragedy but I
don't think you guys get this we as a
community or literally killing ourselves
that's not a metaphor it's not a
hyperbole it's not an exaggeration the
second leading cause of death for people
between the age of 10 and 34 is suicide
after random-ass accidents that no one
can do anything about it's us that are
killing ourselves and this is the thing
people don't realize this because look
at chat right now look at how many
people are here and if one of them kills
themselves tomorrow who's gonna know not
a single [ __ ] person it's happening
just because we see it doesn't mean it's
happening and it's not going to be the
last so we've got to do more
so what can you do the first thing is
let someone else help you
second thing is help yourself third
thing is help someone else in terms of
helping yourself if you guys have any
medical professional in your life tell
them if you're struggling with
depression does it [ __ ] matter it
could be a physical therapist doesn't
matter if you have a doctor tell them
that you're struggling there are
resources I think we have a
exclamation-point support kind of thing
talk to your doctor you can also call
your insurance company if you have
insurance and say hey I wanna you know
who's a how can I see a therapist and
they'll walk you through the process you
can go to a website like Psychology
Today or better help or talk space and
sign up for stop and just like browse
profiles and like call people you can
there's weird it's good you guys may not
be very familiar with this but there's
um there's a website called google GOOG
le and it's cool you can just type in
anything in there and it'll give you
information about it so you can even
like it's it's actually like a pretty
sophisticated website it looks simple
but they just have this box and if you
type in therapists and then your
location it'll give you like a list of
therapists in your location it's pretty
cool
it's kind of like a personal assistant
sort of website so you guys can try
using that too
the other thing that you can do if you
guys are struggling is you don't have to
talk to a mental health professional
talk to a friend say hey I think I mean
I should maybe see a therapist but I
don't know how and this is the funny
thing right so look at what your mind
does if you think about how do I see a
therapist you don't know how to figure
it out if a friend comes to you and says
how do I see a therapist you're on that
ship you'll figure not for them you can
use that 10 to 20 percent gaming IQ buff
to solve a problem for them if you can't
afford it this is why organizations like
rise above the disorder exist there are
also some free clinics that offer mental
health care so at Google you can even
try to type like free mental health care
in your city or call someone
right so like a lot of providers will
see people for free who can't afford it
you just have to ask half of the
patients in my practice I see for free
so just ask okay so next thing healthy
gamer so mental health for gamers by
gamers that's what we're about at
healthy gamer and so what are we are we
treatment absolutely not
so what are we how can we do mental
health for gamers if we're not treatment
aren't we telling people oh like are we
pretending to be therapists and we're
not therapists absolutely not so the
reason that the final boss grew up in
the first place is because somewhere
along the way we put all of the burden
on mental health on providers and as a
society we gave up on mental health and
we said for all mental problems go see a
psychiatrist and that's the only
solution that we have and I want you
guys to think about how idiotic this is
people are like oh like dr. K like does
therapy on so you don't do therapy on
stream it's not therapy what I do is I
have human conversations with people
about what's going on in their life that
doesn't make me a therapist that makes
me a decent human being in the fact that
what you guys think I do is therapy
speaks to the problem that like what I
do should be [ __ ] normal that's
what's wrong
and just think about this for a second
is all physical health medicine
you
is all mental health psychiatry
daran lies the problem now we know how
the raid boss got so big because there's
like exercise and diet we acknowledge
that there are nutritionists and
personal trainers that can help you be
physically healthy is it medical
treatment absolutely not
does it prevent or treat heart disease
absolutely so what's missing in our
society and this is why I like life
coaching and executive coaching and all
this kind of crap has popped up because
there are things involving your mental
health that don't have to be therapy or
treatment that people I know this is
shocking there's a depression which is a
clinical illness and then there is
unhappiness which is not and what's our
antidote to unhappiness we don't have
one well why the [ __ ] not right so in
Western medicine
we're not health care we're sick care
like if you think about exercise
exercise sure helps you if you're
unhealthy but once you hit like the
neutral point exercise can elevate you
to be super healthy and what's missing
in our society is that elevation and
that's what we do in healthy gamer what
people I don't think people really get
this but most of what I draw on and
healthy gamer is not psychiatry it's
yoga it's meditation it's wood duh what
we talk about is finding purpose finding
hope finding meaning learning under to
understand how your mind works what I
teach is not psychiatry it's engineering
of the mind that's what we do
yoga chitta vritti nirodh aha' Yoga is
the cessation of fluctuations of the
mind and that is what I try to teach
first and foremost what does that mean
fluctuations of the mind suicidality
comes and goes the mine has fluctuations
happiness joy sadness disappointment
excitement all fluctuations peace comes
from cessation of fluctuations of the
mind that is first and foremost what I
try to teach the rest of it is just
supportive whether it be psychology
psychiatry neuroscience medicine
physiology spirituality my end goal if
you want to be a healthy gamer yoga
chitta vritti nirodh aha' sees the
fluctuations of your mind and you will
be at peace when someone is depressed
and suicidal their mind is very deviated
from the north
that's what we do at a healthy gamer
we want to teach you how you work we
want to teach you how to understand
yourself y'all are playing a game with
the monitor turned off
you don't know what's going on you're
just [ __ ] mashing buttons without any
idea how anything works that's why
you're losing
we're here to teach you how to turn the
monitor on and do we talk about emotions
absolutely does that make it therapy I
don't think so
because like emotions are not the
province of medicine like I don't know
if you guys get this but long human
beings have emotions so does anything
involving emotions make it medical
treatment no like that's the problem is
that we think that like you can't like
you can process your emotions with a
therapist absolutely you can also do a
lot of other things for your mental
health that do not involve treatment and
that's what's missing in our society in
addition to stigma and all that stuff so
think about how you take care of your
mind how do you take care of you
do you lean on other people for support
do you do things that are good for you
do you help yourself out are you just
[ __ ] afk when it comes to yourself
because the answer is yes you are and
that needs to change
so when it comes to healthy gamer this
discussion is incomplete without reckful
so reckful put us on the map 99% of you
are here today because of reckful our
average viewer count priori reckful was
100 after rectal it was 2000
he's the guy gave us the term AoE
healing and he gave people hope but why
didn't healthy gamer blow up it's
because reckful came on and he was like
honest and authentic and like he let
people see him and like this is he was
the start of the silver bullet against
the disease of connection disconnection
because what what happened with reckful
is people connected to him they said
that's not him that's me and we're so
separate and what we need is to be
together and I don't mean that in like a
[ __ ] inspirational calendar kind of
way I mean like very practically like we
need to connect to each other and it is
amazing that he was able to do that and
people thanked me and like sure so I'll
take some things but what I really want
you guys to understand this healthy
gamer is not about me it's about you I
just ask questions the information and
what the learning comes from the person
that I'm talking to and he absolutely
gave people hope and people were like
man I'm gonna see a therapist like if
reckful can get help like I can get help
he gave us hope right but it wasn't
enough he had everything he had money he
had fame he had adoration he even had
six streams with dr. King and it wasn't
enough and so he gave you hope and he
killed himself does that mean that you
shouldn't lose hope makes sense right
because reckful had it all
should you lose help
makes sense he's gone he's what got us
started
but I don't think you should what's up
and once again not because of a positive
calendar kind of way but I want you to
think about this because if he can lose
the battle
you can and what do I mean by that
reckful had money he had fame he had
adoration and access to dr. kay
and what I want you guys to understand
is if that month if money doesn't buy
happiness then being broke doesn't cause
you to lose happiness right these are
independent variables are they a factor
with each other absolutely but if he can
lose you can win right now you guys look
at your life and you say if only this
was different then I would be happy but
what I want you guys to really
understand about byron is all of those
things were different about him and he
still wasn't it wasn't enough but the
cool thing is that like that's
devastating in some way but I want you
guys to really understand that means
that the struggle against depression and
suicide and fighting that war means that
you at the end of the day it's about you
it's a personal struggle and money like
sure money helps because you're gonna
have access to resources and things like
that but for someone to be so loved and
also so and to still lose means that you
actually have hope
so if money doesn't buy happiness then
being broke doesn't buy sadness and at
the end of the day there is nothing you
can do to afk at this game
you've got to fight it like it doesn't
matter whether you have advantages or
disadvantages whether you've got a suite
like epic sword or you've got some like
half broken piece of trash like you've
got to fight the battle it doesn't
matter and no amount of anything that
anyone can give you ultimately makes it
so that you do not have to pick up and
fight you've got to fight that bad
and it is a personal battle but you guys
don't have to fight it alone
and I think that despite all of reckful
'he's out of everything that he gave to
us i think at the end of it
and unfortunately he was fighting it
alone and he lost but just because he
lost doesn't mean that you have to so
what happens when a champion Falls he
gave us so much like I remember you know
being like a 20 year old kid playing Wow
and like watching his videos and I was
like damn that guy's awesome like I wish
I could be like that good Wow
I was a fan he was a friend of mine and
what do we do in a champion false so we
stop talking it's a personal battle and
all of us have to fight it but you have
to fight it but you don't have to fight
it alone you absolutely don't have to
fight it alone and I don't want you to
fight it alone and I'm not going to let
you fight alone
I'm gonna fight with but I can't I can't
I can't do it alone
so I've got a pretty big HP pool I've
got 100 hit points I lost 80 of them
yesterday
I lost most of my HP bar and I'm you
know it's kind of like if it came when
so my HP bars flashing and my UI is like
red at the corners so I can't take much
more of this and every time I work with
someone I I give a piece of myself to
them and yesterday the piece that I had
given to rectal died with him and what
causes me to lose life is when y'all
lose life so spirit like link [ __ ] and
what causes me the game life is when
y'all came and I can do a lot guys I
really can and I tried with reckful I
really did but I can't do this alone
because at the end of the day I'm not
superhuman I'm just me I have two hands
I have one heart I have one voice I have
two ears I'm human I want to be more
than human I try to be superhuman but
I'm not and we think about reckful is
superhuman but he wasn't either so this
is the thing guys I can't do this alone
and I can't take much more of it and so
what I need you guys to do first and
foremost is live cuz every time y'all
died piece of me diced that's what
happens a piece of us died yesterday
and I need your help I need to do it and
I need everything that we do here to be
worth it Mitchell we get better because
I could do this look each I did you look
like a boat making it your life that's
what keeps me oh I can't take much more
sad because I'm a human I gave a piece
of myself to each and every one of you
and I give it willingly but I don't have
that much left to give
I just can't guys I'm sorry it reckful
gave us the best part of him I don't
know if you guys realize that he worked
hard and he struggled with this for
decades ever since his brother killed
himself and with Everland he tried to
create what he needed as a child what
was ever land it was a place of
connection and he gave the best part of
himself for us
streaming connecting building Everland
giving us enjoyment
he didn't leave enough for himself
so really what you guys need to do is be
better take care of yourselves the last
thing that he's giving us with his death
is a call touch what are you doing the
champion balls you thought you'd pick up
you fight you eat you don't give up and
if we fight before you do better reach
you with this war but you don't [ __ ]
stop
and just because he did doesn't mean
that we have to and there's a part of me
that says that you know you shouldn't
blame yourself for is that than you
really shouldn't because it's really not
anyone's fault but that doesn't mean
that you aren't responsible it doesn't
mean that you have a dharma it just
means we got to do better so take care
of yourselves let someone else take care
of you start to live and be an
inspiration for other people get your
[ __ ] together and if you can't get your
[ __ ] together don't beat yourself up for
it and let someone help you
because I don't know how much longer we
can take this it's not just me this is
getting worse not better and it requires
each and every one of us and understand
that if if you want us to win this war
if you care about twitch and you care
about me and you care about everyone
else even if you're a piece of [ __ ] you
don't care about yourself you better
take care of yourself because you owe it
to us to not have a piece of us die with
you
even if you're not worth it we're worth
it and do it for us
so he gave us the best parts of who he
was and I am too so don't leave us
hanging
you owe us no less you owe him no less
than to give the best parts of who you
are
if you do any less than that I'll be
disappointed thank you guys very much
for giving me this opportunity to speak
let's not let him down
[Music]
you